README.md, before:

# fk — filter-kernel

A modernized, modular awk clone built in Rust.

> **Note** — This is a personal project built as a learning exercise. It is not
> intended as a production tool and may not be actively maintained. You are
> welcome to explore the code, open issues, or fork it, but please set your
> expectations accordingly.

## Intent

`fk` aims to replicate the core text-processing model of awk — read input, split into records and fields, match patterns, execute actions — while providing a cleaner foundation that is easy to extend. Each category of functionality (I/O, field splitting, pattern matching, expressions, built-in functions, etc.) lives in its own module so new capabilities can be added without touching unrelated code.

### Design principles

- **Modular** — every concern is a separate module behind a clear interface.
- **Minimal dependencies** — lean on the Rust standard library; pull in crates only when they genuinely earn their keep.
- **Incremental** — built in deliberate steps, each one leaving a usable tool.

## Architecture

```
src/
  main.rs              – entry point, orchestration
  cli.rs               – command-line argument parsing
  lexer.rs             – tokeniser
  parser.rs            – recursive-descent parser (tokens → AST)
  action.rs            – executor core: pattern matching, statements, expressions
  runtime.rs           – runtime state (variables, fields, arrays, Value type)
  field.rs             – field splitting (FS / OFS semantics)
  error.rs             – source-location-aware diagnostics (Span type)
  repl.rs              – interactive REPL mode
  input/
    mod.rs             – Record struct, RecordReader trait, source orchestration
    line.rs            – default line-oriented reader
    csv.rs             – RFC 4180 CSV/TSV reader (quoted fields, multi-line)
    json.rs            – JSON Lines (NDJSON) reader
    regex_rs.rs        – regex-based record separator reader
    parquet_reader.rs  – Apache Parquet reader (optional feature)
  builtins/
    mod.rs             – dispatch table, coercion helpers
    string.rs          – length, substr, index, trim, reverse, chr, ord, …
    math.rs            – sin, cos, sqrt, abs, ceil, floor, rand, min, max, …
    time.rs            – systime, strftime, mktime, parsedate
    printf.rs          – format_printf and spec helpers
    json.rs            – jpath() JSON path access (jq-light)
```

## Progress

Phases 0–8 complete. See [docs/progress.md](docs/progress.md) for the full checklist.

## Usage

```sh
# Print second field of every line (tab-separated)
echo -e "a\tb\nc\td" | fk -F'\t' '{ print $2 }'

# Sum a column
fk '{ sum += $1 } END { print sum }' numbers.txt

# Pattern match
fk '/error/ { print NR, $0 }' log.txt

# Exponentiation and hex literals
echo "4" | fk '{ print $1 ** 0.5, 0xFF }'

# Negative field indexes (last field)
echo "a b c d" | fk '{ print $-1 }'

# Time functions
echo "" | fk '{ print strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S", systime()) }'

# Run a shell command
echo "" | fk '{ system("echo hello from system()") }'

# Print to stderr
echo "oops" | fk '{ print $0 > "/dev/stderr" }'

# CSV input (RFC 4180: handles quoted fields, embedded commas)
echo -e 'name,age\n"Alice",30\n"Bob ""B""",25' | fk -i csv '{ print $1, $2 }'

# TSV input
echo -e 'x\t10\ny\t20' | fk -i tsv '{ sum += $2 } END { print sum }'

# Header mode: first line defines column names in HDR array
echo -e 'name,score\nAlice,95\nBob,87' | fk -i csv -H '{ print HDR[1], $1 }'

# JSON lines input (fields are values in insertion order)
echo '{"name":"Alice","age":30}' | fk -i json '{ print $1, $2 }'

# jpath: navigate nested JSON (jq-light)
echo '{"users":[{"name":"Alice"},{"name":"Bob"}]}' | fk '{ print jpath($0, ".users[1].name") }'

# jpath: iterate — .users[].name or .users.name (implicit iteration)
echo '{"users":[{"id":1},{"id":2},{"id":3}]}' | fk '{ print jpath($0, ".users[].id") }'

# jpath: extract iterated values into awk array
echo '{"items":[10,20,30]}' | fk '{ n = jpath($0, ".items", a); for (i=1; i<=n; i++) print a[i] }'

# Multi-char RS as regex (paragraph mode)
printf 'a\nb\n\nc\nd\n' | fk -v 'RS=\n\n' '{ print NR, $0 }'

# Unicode-aware: length, substr, index count characters, not bytes
echo "café" | fk '{ print length($0), substr($0,4,1) }'

# Read program from file
echo '{ print $2 }' > prog.awk
fk -f prog.awk data.txt

# FILENAME and FNR across multiple files
fk '{ print FILENAME, FNR, $0 }' file1.txt file2.txt

# do-while loop (runs body at least once)
echo 5 | fk '{ i=$1; do { print i; i-- } while (i>0) }'

# break and continue
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { for (i=1; i<=10; i++) { if (i==5) break; print i } }'

# exit with code
fk '{ if ($0 == "STOP") exit(1); print }' input.txt

# close() — reopen a file for writing
echo "" | fk '{ print "first" > "/tmp/x"; close("/tmp/x"); print "second" > "/tmp/x" }'

# gensub — return modified string without changing $0
echo "hello world" | fk '{ print gensub("o", "0", "g") }'

# Computed regex — match operator with variable patterns
echo -e "hello\n123\nworld" | fk '{ pat="^[0-9]+$"; if ($0 ~ pat) print "number:", $0 }'

# ENVIRON — access environment variables
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { print ENVIRON["HOME"] }'

# Multi-dimensional arrays
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { a[1,2]="x"; a[3,4]="y"; for (k in a) print k, a[k] }'

# REPL / interactive mode
# fk --repl
# fk> BEGIN { x = 42; print x }
# 42
# fk> :vars
# fk> :q

# ── Phase 8: Signature features ──

# Parquet files — query by column name
fk -i parquet '$age > 30 { print $name, $city }' data.parquet

# Quoted column names (hyphens, spaces, dots)
fk -i parquet '{ print $"user-name", $"total.revenue" }' data.parquet

# CSV with named columns (header mode)
echo -e 'name,age,city\nAlice,30,NYC\nBob,25,LA' | fk -F, -H '$age > 28 { print $name }'

# match() with capture groups
echo "2025-01-15" | fk '{ match($0, "([0-9]+)-([0-9]+)-([0-9]+)", cap); print cap[1], cap[2], cap[3] }'

# Sort array values and join
echo -e 'c\na\nb' | fk '{ a[NR]=$0 } END { asort(a); print join(a, ",") }'

# typeof() introspection
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { x=42; y="hi"; z[1]=1; print typeof(x), typeof(y), typeof(z), typeof(w) }'

# Bitwise operations
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { print and(0xFF, 0x0F), lshift(1, 8) }'

# Math: rand, abs, ceil, floor, round, min, max
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { srand(42); print rand(), abs(-5), ceil(2.3), floor(2.7), min(3,7), max(3,7) }'

# String: trim, reverse, chr, ord, hex
echo "  hello  " | fk '{ print trim($0), reverse("abc"), chr(65), ord("A"), hex(255) }'

# parsedate — parse date string to epoch
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { print parsedate("2025-01-15 10:30:00", "%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S") }'
```

## Performance

`make bench-compare` runs fk and awk head-to-head on a 1M-line CSV.
fk is faster than awk on every benchmark (1.1–3.2× faster):

| Benchmark | fk | awk | Speedup |
|---|---|---|---|
| `print $2` | 0.48 s | 0.58 s | 1.2× |
| Sum column | 0.24 s | 0.60 s | 2.5× |
| `/active/` count | 0.24 s | 0.76 s | 3.2× |
| Field arithmetic | 0.25 s | 0.62 s | 2.5× |
| Associative array | 0.28 s | 0.67 s | 2.4× |
| Computed regex | 0.34 s | 0.65 s | 1.9× |
| Tight loop (3×) | 0.70 s | 0.75 s | 1.1× |

Parquet support reads 1M rows, auto-extracts column names, and runs
pattern-action programs with named field access — no other awk can do this.

Measured on Apple M3 Pro, 36 GB RAM, macOS 26.2.
awk version 20200816 (macOS system awk). `fk` built with `--release`.

## Building

```sh
# Default build (includes Parquet support)
cargo build --release

# Without Parquet (lighter binary, no arrow/parquet deps)
cargo build --release --no-default-features

# binary: target/release/fk
```

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add acknowledgments for awk creators, soften tagline
Credit Aho, Weinberger, and Kernighan for awk, C, regex theory,
and the Unix filter philosophy. Change "modernized" to "slightly
modernized" in README and Cargo.toml.

README.md, after:

# fk — filter-kernel

A slightly modernized awk clone built in Rust.

> **Note** — This is a personal project built as a learning exercise. It is not
> intended as a production tool and may not be actively maintained. You are
> welcome to explore the code, open issues, or fork it, but please set your
> expectations accordingly.

## Intent

`fk` aims to replicate the core text-processing model of awk — read input, split into records and fields, match patterns, execute actions — while providing a cleaner foundation that is easy to extend. Each category of functionality (I/O, field splitting, pattern matching, expressions, built-in functions, etc.) lives in its own module so new capabilities can be added without touching unrelated code.

### Design principles

- **Modular** — every concern is a separate module behind a clear interface.
- **Minimal dependencies** — lean on the Rust standard library; pull in crates only when they genuinely earn their keep.
- **Incremental** — built in deliberate steps, each one leaving a usable tool.

## Architecture

```
src/
  main.rs              – entry point, orchestration
  cli.rs               – command-line argument parsing
  lexer.rs             – tokeniser
  parser.rs            – recursive-descent parser (tokens → AST)
  action.rs            – executor core: pattern matching, statements, expressions
  runtime.rs           – runtime state (variables, fields, arrays, Value type)
  field.rs             – field splitting (FS / OFS semantics)
  error.rs             – source-location-aware diagnostics (Span type)
  repl.rs              – interactive REPL mode
  input/
    mod.rs             – Record struct, RecordReader trait, source orchestration
    line.rs            – default line-oriented reader
    csv.rs             – RFC 4180 CSV/TSV reader (quoted fields, multi-line)
    json.rs            – JSON Lines (NDJSON) reader
    regex_rs.rs        – regex-based record separator reader
    parquet_reader.rs  – Apache Parquet reader (optional feature)
  builtins/
    mod.rs             – dispatch table, coercion helpers
    string.rs          – length, substr, index, trim, reverse, chr, ord, …
    math.rs            – sin, cos, sqrt, abs, ceil, floor, rand, min, max, …
    time.rs            – systime, strftime, mktime, parsedate
    printf.rs          – format_printf and spec helpers
    json.rs            – jpath() JSON path access (jq-light)
```

## Progress

Phases 0–8 complete. See [docs/progress.md](docs/progress.md) for the full checklist.

## Usage

```sh
# Print second field of every line (tab-separated)
echo -e "a\tb\nc\td" | fk -F'\t' '{ print $2 }'

# Sum a column
fk '{ sum += $1 } END { print sum }' numbers.txt

# Pattern match
fk '/error/ { print NR, $0 }' log.txt

# Exponentiation and hex literals
echo "4" | fk '{ print $1 ** 0.5, 0xFF }'

# Negative field indexes (last field)
echo "a b c d" | fk '{ print $-1 }'

# Time functions
echo "" | fk '{ print strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S", systime()) }'

# Run a shell command
echo "" | fk '{ system("echo hello from system()") }'

# Print to stderr
echo "oops" | fk '{ print $0 > "/dev/stderr" }'

# CSV input (RFC 4180: handles quoted fields, embedded commas)
echo -e 'name,age\n"Alice",30\n"Bob ""B""",25' | fk -i csv '{ print $1, $2 }'

# TSV input
echo -e 'x\t10\ny\t20' | fk -i tsv '{ sum += $2 } END { print sum }'

# Header mode: first line defines column names in HDR array
echo -e 'name,score\nAlice,95\nBob,87' | fk -i csv -H '{ print HDR[1], $1 }'

# JSON lines input (fields are values in insertion order)
echo '{"name":"Alice","age":30}' | fk -i json '{ print $1, $2 }'

# jpath: navigate nested JSON (jq-light)
echo '{"users":[{"name":"Alice"},{"name":"Bob"}]}' | fk '{ print jpath($0, ".users[1].name") }'

# jpath: iterate — .users[].name or .users.name (implicit iteration)
echo '{"users":[{"id":1},{"id":2},{"id":3}]}' | fk '{ print jpath($0, ".users[].id") }'

# jpath: extract iterated values into awk array
echo '{"items":[10,20,30]}' | fk '{ n = jpath($0, ".items", a); for (i=1; i<=n; i++) print a[i] }'

# Multi-char RS as regex (paragraph mode)
printf 'a\nb\n\nc\nd\n' | fk -v 'RS=\n\n' '{ print NR, $0 }'

# Unicode-aware: length, substr, index count characters, not bytes
echo "café" | fk '{ print length($0), substr($0,4,1) }'

# Read program from file
echo '{ print $2 }' > prog.awk
fk -f prog.awk data.txt

# FILENAME and FNR across multiple files
fk '{ print FILENAME, FNR, $0 }' file1.txt file2.txt

# do-while loop (runs body at least once)
echo 5 | fk '{ i=$1; do { print i; i-- } while (i>0) }'

# break and continue
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { for (i=1; i<=10; i++) { if (i==5) break; print i } }'

# exit with code
fk '{ if ($0 == "STOP") exit(1); print }' input.txt

# close() — reopen a file for writing
echo "" | fk '{ print "first" > "/tmp/x"; close("/tmp/x"); print "second" > "/tmp/x" }'

# gensub — return modified string without changing $0
echo "hello world" | fk '{ print gensub("o", "0", "g") }'

# Computed regex — match operator with variable patterns
echo -e "hello\n123\nworld" | fk '{ pat="^[0-9]+$"; if ($0 ~ pat) print "number:", $0 }'

# ENVIRON — access environment variables
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { print ENVIRON["HOME"] }'

# Multi-dimensional arrays
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { a[1,2]="x"; a[3,4]="y"; for (k in a) print k, a[k] }'

# REPL / interactive mode
# fk --repl
# fk> BEGIN { x = 42; print x }
# 42
# fk> :vars
# fk> :q

# ── Phase 8: Signature features ──

# Parquet files — query by column name
fk -i parquet '$age > 30 { print $name, $city }' data.parquet

# Quoted column names (hyphens, spaces, dots)
fk -i parquet '{ print $"user-name", $"total.revenue" }' data.parquet

# CSV with named columns (header mode)
echo -e 'name,age,city\nAlice,30,NYC\nBob,25,LA' | fk -F, -H '$age > 28 { print $name }'

# match() with capture groups
echo "2025-01-15" | fk '{ match($0, "([0-9]+)-([0-9]+)-([0-9]+)", cap); print cap[1], cap[2], cap[3] }'

# Sort array values and join
echo -e 'c\na\nb' | fk '{ a[NR]=$0 } END { asort(a); print join(a, ",") }'

# typeof() introspection
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { x=42; y="hi"; z[1]=1; print typeof(x), typeof(y), typeof(z), typeof(w) }'

# Bitwise operations
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { print and(0xFF, 0x0F), lshift(1, 8) }'

# Math: rand, abs, ceil, floor, round, min, max
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { srand(42); print rand(), abs(-5), ceil(2.3), floor(2.7), min(3,7), max(3,7) }'

# String: trim, reverse, chr, ord, hex
echo "  hello  " | fk '{ print trim($0), reverse("abc"), chr(65), ord("A"), hex(255) }'

# parsedate — parse date string to epoch
echo "" | fk 'BEGIN { print parsedate("2025-01-15 10:30:00", "%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S") }'
```

## Performance

`make bench-compare` runs fk and awk head-to-head on a 1M-line CSV.
fk is faster than awk on every benchmark (1.1–3.2× faster):

| Benchmark | fk | awk | Speedup |
|---|---|---|---|
| `print $2` | 0.48 s | 0.58 s | 1.2× |
| Sum column | 0.24 s | 0.60 s | 2.5× |
| `/active/` count | 0.24 s | 0.76 s | 3.2× |
| Field arithmetic | 0.25 s | 0.62 s | 2.5× |
| Associative array | 0.28 s | 0.67 s | 2.4× |
| Computed regex | 0.34 s | 0.65 s | 1.9× |
| Tight loop (3×) | 0.70 s | 0.75 s | 1.1× |

Parquet support reads 1M rows, auto-extracts column names, and runs
pattern-action programs with named field access — no other awk can do this.

Measured on Apple M3 Pro, 36 GB RAM, macOS 26.2.
awk version 20200816 (macOS system awk). `fk` built with `--release`.

## Building

```sh
# Default build (includes Parquet support)
cargo build --release

# Without Parquet (lighter binary, no arrow/parquet deps)
cargo build --release --no-default-features

# binary: target/release/fk
```

## Acknowledgments

`fk` is a love letter to **awk**, created in 1977 by Alfred Aho, Peter
Weinberger, and Brian Kernighan at Bell Labs. Their design — records, fields,
patterns, actions — remains one of the most elegant ideas in computing.

This project also leans on other things they gave us. The `printf` format
strings implemented here come straight from C, co-authored by Kernighan and
Dennis Ritchie. The regular expression theory underpinning the `regex` crate
traces back to Aho's work on finite automata. And the entire premise of `fk` —
a small, composable text filter that reads from stdin and writes to stdout —
is the Unix philosophy that Kernighan helped articulate.

Standing on the shoulders of giants, writing a not-so-small toy. 😄

## License

MIT
